Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
Hansel minutes.golf. It's Hansel minutes.
Oh, weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcer show
number four 18. In this
episode, Scott talks with Lisa Larson
Kelly about web RTC. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes, and I'm talking with
Lisa Larson Kelly from learn from
lisa.com. She's gonna teach me
about web RTC. So that's
real time communications that's as
much as I know. Yes,
it is real time communication
on the web. I know
that there's web sockets though.
Well, how is this different
from web sockets? The big
difference is that it's peer
to peer for one thing.
And it's just, it's also
native in the browser, the
peer peer to peer connections.
Which one are you saying?
Even the browser. That means
I don't have to think
about a plugins, right? Right.
No plugins. That's the ideal
and yeah, no plugins at
all. It's native right now
though. I have to say
it's only in Chrome Firefox
and a little bit in
opera. And, and how did
this start? And what is
the, what is the ultimate
goal? Ah, well, it started
out with a few of
the bigger players, you know,
Erickson, Google, and a bunch
of other people got together
over an informal lunch actually
and said, Hey, we should
be able to do real
time communication natively, shouldn't we?
And they said, yes, we
can. And so they formed
a couple of working groups
and it got worked on
underway. So when we say
real time communications, this is
real time communications from one
browser to another browser, right?
Not from the browser to
the server. Well, funny, you
should say that it's actually,
a lot of times people
will think of this and
think, Oh, I can build
an, I can build my
Skype killer. You know, you
can do a right in
the browser. I can do
a webcam to webcam. It's
more than that though, because
you can also have a
machine to machine. So for
example, Chrome cast is using
this right now and, you
know, so you can really
start to use it in
the whole internet of things
world. Oh, okay. So we
had someone on from a
Plex recently on the show
talking about Chromecast. And one
of the things that was
interesting about it was that
there's a handoff where I
take my iPhone and I
say, go play YouTube here.
And everyone thought that, you
know, the kind of traditional
way that people who understand
internet architecture like myself assume
is that the iPhone would
then be coordinating with the
Chrome cast. But in fact
it talks, you're saying peer-to-peer
with the Chromecast hands-off and
then the iPhone is no
longer involved Right now. It's,
you know, Google of course
has their own special sauce
that, you know, the reserve,
you know, they've got a
bunch of stuff that they're
doing under the hood there,
but the main structure of
it is, is yes, as
web RTC based in, in,
in that technology. And there's
a, there's a really interesting
demo. It's a video chat
demo@apprtc.app spot.com. And there's this
notion of user media. What
is this about? Get user
media is one of the
web RTC API APIs. And
it lets you grab the
webcam and microphone from the
browser, and then you can
take that stream and share
it among peers. So yeah,
well an app RTC is
a great kind of way
to get started with that.
It's an open source example
and it lets you create
this two way, video conversation,
Fullscreen without any extra servers
or plugins or anything in
the way. So you're saying
that I could write some
Java script, put it in
a local HTML file and
you know, with some number
of lines of code, not
a huge amount and the
right browser, you and I
could have a video chat,
not a Skype killer, but
a basic peer to peer
video chat. Yes. Yes. That
is true. What about things
like Nat traversal and firewalls?
Yeah, I know that's where
things can fit crazy peer
to peer, ideally. Right. We
can just connect right to
each other and nothing in
the way. But unfortunately we
run into NATS and firewalls,
so we can't actually get
that connection. We have to,
you know, bust that net
basically to do this. We
need some servers. So there
are a couple of levels
that you would go through
first, you would try a
stunned server. And the sun
server is basically like, what's
my IP, you know, that
service. So it'll go out
and say, okay, you know,
I'm, I'm on this internal
network. You go out to
the stun server and say,
tell me what my external
IP is. It'll pass that
information back to you. Then
you can send it out
to the peer that you
want to connect to. They
can do the same. And
then you're connected. If that
doesn't work, if you're, you
are behind a restrictive firewall,
then you'll have to start
using a turn server. So
you'll have to specify that
as the app creator, you'll
have to either use a
service or set it up
yourself and what the turn
server does is it, it
sets up a relay. So
you're not actually peer to
peer at that point and
still feels that way. And
the user wouldn't really know
the difference, but, but you're
actually, you know, that information
is being relayed through them.
Okay. So let's, let's bring
that down a little bit
to the, the average person
who is listening to this
shows a perspective, cause you
said first, we said Nat.
Yeah. Right. So, you know,
Nat network address translation as
a way for letting folks
behind firewalls pretend that they're
really not behind firewalls. Right?
Right. Exactly. So that you
can, you know, know what
their full addresses externally outside
of their local network. And
it's funny that we have
we've, we've built so much
technology that layers on so
many other technologies that we're
starting to get these multiple
nested acronyms. So you said,
you said a stun server,
that's usually called session traversal
utilities for Nat, which is
itself its own thing. It's
a, it's an acronym of
an acronym. Yeah. I've also
heard people call stunned simple
traversal of UDP through NATS.
So there's multiple, multiple acronyms,
You know, it all does
the same thing. Right? Fancy,
fancy way to explain it
as a stunned server. But
this is just a way
to discover an IP address.
It is. It's just a
way to discover, you know,
a direct connection to another
peer Are these servers that
I need to make. If
I go and write my
video, chat, Skype killer, am
I going to have to
go and write stun and
turn servers? It depends if
you want to, if you're
into that kind of thing,
you know, you want to,
you have a lot of
options out there as far
as open source versions of
those servers that you can
go and do that set
up your own or there's
services as well. There's a
few, you know, few commercial
ones out there that are
already setting up shop for
these kinds of applications. And
Google has just for developers
who want to play around
with it. Google has a
couple that you can just
plug into. You can just
Google that, you know, you
can get those addresses, but
you can't, they're not so
reliable. So you don't want
to yeah, of course go
into development. Okay. So it
sounds like Wellston and turn
is, is something I need
to think about, know about,
I don't need to go
and sit down and start
opening sockets and writing this
stuff myself. I can find
the apps or find the
servers to do that. Yup,
exactly. You know, with the,
with the advent of HTML
five and before web RTC,
we started to see kind
of this, this increase in
access to device hardware. So
it seems like this really
wouldn't Nick web RTC wouldn't
have been as interesting, had
the work to do get
user media happened first. Okay,
Exactly. Yeah, for sure. It
got people excited. Like, wow,
I can't, you know, I
don't have to use a
plugin to grab the microphone
and, and grab the webcam
and then, okay, now we
have that access now what
do we do with it?
Exactly like, okay, I can,
you know, I can put
a hat on you and
you can dance around or
we actually go out and
create a pure connection. Wow.
That's better. Well, that's actually
very interesting that the hat
example, while it kind of
a trivial does give you
the sense of you have
raw access to that image
that's coming back or that
audio stream that's coming in.
Yes you do. And you
can even access the bitmap
of that as well and
grab screenshots or, you know,
take pictures, photo booth kind
of thing, whatever you want
to do. I've found that
as someone who knows how
like the most advanced kind
of thing that I've done
is just dealing with file
upload. You say input type
equals file. And I think
most everyone who's listening has
done that. You know, we've
accepted a file upload. And
then when you hear about
things like cameras and microphones
and camcorders, it's just like,
Whoa, that's that's way too
complicated, but you can just
start by saying input type
equals file. Right. Well, it's
funny, you should talk about
the about data because I've
been telling you, we've been
talking about getting user media
and all that, and it's,
it is also sharing of,
of raw data. So, so
you could theoretically set up
a file sharing, you know,
whole file sharing for sharing
service using this and people
have done. So there's one
site that escapes me at
the moment, the name of
it, but you can go
there and on their homepage
is a box. You drag
the file, drop it on
the box. It pops up
with a link. You share
that with a friend and
they're getting that file from
your hard drive instantly, instantly
in anonymously. RTC. Doesn't think
about anything other than the,
the underlying protocol. It's not
set up for chat or
set up for video. No,
it's just, it's sharing data
and you do, you know,
what you do with that
is up to you. That's
very useful to know. So
it's more than just a
Skype killer. If there's some
way need for me to
peer, to peer something in
a secure way. And it
is also, you know, it's
all encrypted in the spec,
you know, that's specified that
everything is encrypted. Ah, okay.
So it's a little harder
to shoot myself in the
foot with this, A little
harder, a little harder for
the NSA, but you know,
I'm sure there's the little
list they're listening right now.
So yeah. Subscribe to the
show, so sure, sure. Yeah.
So, so I I've learned
that I can go and
say input type equals file
in HTML and then say,
except image capture equal camera
or capture equal microphone. You
can get that live data.
You can apply it to
a canvas. You can put
web GL filters on it.
At that point, it's just
data in memory. And then
I can call upon web
RTC and then just push
it across from there. Yeah.
That sounds simple. Yes, no
problem. Yeah. I mean, it's
really possible to do, to
do all of this, but
it isn't trivial unfortunately. About
what about things like peer
JS and different things that
can allow me to like
raise the water level a
little That's yeah, that that's,
that would be my next
thing to introduce is the
of frameworks that have already
figured out a lot of
this hard stuff for us,
there are more and more
of them pure JS has
one. And I actually use
that one as an example,
a lot just for one-to-one
one to one video chats
and things like that. It's
very easy to set up
with pure JS. If you
want to go beyond the,
the two people though, you'll
have to use something more
like simple web RTC, where
it has a little bit
more robust sort of modular
architecture, but there are definitely
frameworks out there and make
all of this stuff a
lot easier. You just have
to find one that already
does what you want it
to do for the most
part. And these are all
done in JavaScript. They don't
care about a backend, a
dotnet person or a node
person or PHP person can
use all of, Yeah. There's,
you know, Java script is
the main, main API, but
there are a lot of
ways to deal with it.
Now, if you're I'm a
no JS person, definitely there's
modules for that, you know,
support web RTC and help
you with your development. There
you can. I, I think
there's also frameworks and other
languages too, because web RTC
really is very open. So
you're not only communicating over
the web and web technologies,
but you can also communicate
with sip with plain telephone
networks. So you can send
text messages, there's interfaces for
all of these different interoperabilities
available And sip again, parsing
out. Yes, yes, yes. Sip
is used, it's mostly telecommunications
type thing, but it's for,
you know, low-latency data, text
messages, things like that you
would use for a USIP.
Does that mean that not
that know, we thought about
our, our Skype killer, but
I also use for example,
link, which is a Microsoft
product. There's also things like
asterix there's these different VoIP,
voiceover IP things like Vonage.
Could I potentially build my
own phone and plug it
into a backend system in
my browser? Absolutely. Absolutely. You
could. Sure. No. Do we
know if Google uses things
like this? If they, if
you're using like a Google
hangout or Google Hangouts yeah.
Get Google Hangouts uses web
RTC for sure. The voice.
I'm not sure I, that
came a little bit earlier.
I'm not sure what they're,
I'm sure that there's some
web RTC components there, but
now that they're, I just
heard they're phasing it out.
I'm kind of sad about
that, but that's another thing
altogether, but yeah, Google Hangouts
definitely uses us and there
are ways, you know, you
can, you can plug into
all sorts of other tools
and frameworks to, to add
functionality, like who will Hangouts
has that nice feature where
whoever's talking takes up the
screen, right? So you could
listen on the audio API
and, and find out who's
speaking and you could do
the same thing. So, you
know, there are a lot
of different ways to do
some creative things with us
that either mimic what's already
been done or, you know,
invent your own. Now when,
when researching web RTC and
trying to understand what's involved
and how I would write
to it, I see lots
and lots of blog posts
and people talking about something
called signaling and they keep
saying web RTC and signaling.
And it seems like web
RTC is working along nicely,
but no one can agree
on signaling. What is signaling
and why do I care
Signaling? Yeah. You know, signaling
comes in, cause you, you,
you're thinking you can have
these, these peers that are
talking to each other, right.
Well, how did they get
that connection? How did they
get there? They didn't make,
you know, how do you
make that initial handshake that's
signaling? So you'll need some
sort of low latency data
channel to send that handshake
information, say, Oh, this is
my external IP. Or, you
know, this is the relay
server that I'm using. And
to do that with RTC
does not help us. There's
nothing in the spec that
specifies what you need to
use for signaling. It's totally
up to you. So, you
know, well, it would be
nice if there was something
that was built in, it's
also very freeing because you
can use whatever technology is
a good fit for you.
So, you know, if you're
telecommunications person, you could use
sip. If you're a web
person, use web sockets, for
example, or actually try polling
or, you know, whatever, you
know, it's totally up to
you, whatever your strength is,
whatever your infrastructure already would
support. I see. So where
do you see answers? The
question of we're on the
phone? How are we talking
to each other? But as
far as how we dialed
and all of that handshake,
some people seem to think
that this is a huge
problem and we need to
solve this and standardize it.
And everyone else is like,
Oh, we've got rest. We
can just make our own
webs web services to handle
that. Exactly. No problem. I
saw a blog post that
said that there's a new,
a digital version of an
old joke that says two
web RTC engineers walk into
a bar to talk about
signaling, except that they never
get to leave. It seems
like this is a problem
that is not going to
be solved anytime soon. So
we should think about how
to do this. Yes. Yeah.
For sure. Find out the
solution that, that works best
for you and the way
you work, then, you know,
language, youth that you know,
and or what systems do
you have to work within.
I see lots of getting
started examples and lots of
little chat servers and things
like that, but would someone
really want to go, you
know, live today with a
web RCT, a web RTC
based product. I mean, other
than Google Hangouts who certainly
control the browser and the
server. Sure. And somehow, or
they're able to make it
work in all browsers. I
assume there's a fallback. Right.
I mean, it works, it
works in other things, they
use a plugin, They use
a plugin. Yeah, exactly. So
they'll prompt you. Oh, you
know, just click here to
install our little tiny thing
that you need to use
this, you know, and then
everybody just moves on and
because it's Google, nobody complains,
but if it were you
or I saying, Oh, I'm
all my plugin. Well, maybe
not. Yeah. Well, I mean,
if, if it is a
small, if it is perceived
that it's a small plugin
that sits between me and
an awesome experience, presumably I
will just suck it up.
But I think I, I
will admit though, I did
not realize how many hidden
plugins and hidden extensions were
around just to support Hangouts
and voice on Google. I
think we just assumed it
was built into Chrome. Yeah.
Cause they make it feel
that way. For sure. But
yeah. As far as getting
started and building something to
take to market, I think
now's a perfect time to
do that because nobody else
has done it yet. Like
why do you want to
wait until somebody else has
already had your big idea?
Or do you want to
actually go out and learn
this and do it now
because it's coming. I really
have no doubt that they're
going to get all this,
those guys are going to
get out of that bar.
Eventually this is going to
happen. It's just a matter
of, you know, everybody working
things out. And if, if
it is, you know, a
small plugin or if there's
something, you know, if we
get critical mass, then having
a plugin to make a
web RTC work in, I
E it won't be that
big of a deal. You
know, I wonder if I
should just use something like
open talk or talk box
T O K box instead,
You know, it's certainly is
an option. If what you're
building, if you don't, first
of all, if you don't
mind using third party and
if, if what you're building
is a good fit for
it, you know, if you
have to, if there's a
feature that it's not supported,
they do have open. So,
you know, it is open
source. So you could theoretically
build on, but you're building
onto their framework. Cause they've
built an API kind of
on top of it in
their, in their docs. They
actually say, and I think
this is a funny phrasing,
go beyond vanilla web RTC.
And by putting the word
vanilla in front of it,
that implies that somehow web
RTC isn't sufficient go beyond
vanilla with our API. So
it's, it's interesting. People are
building on top of this
and they're doing it in
a way that is extending
it, presumably with things like
that. Yeah, Yeah. Extending it
was signaling or with their
own, you know, features or
tapping into other voice over
IP networks, you know, bringing
you could, you know, build
something on top of, of
that, that just does something
new, you know, does something
connects to something that it
didn't connect to before, like
your refrigerator or your microwave
or something, What are some
of the demos that you've
seen or the uses of
web RTC that would surprise
you, that aren't just chat
and Skype killers? Hmm. There's
a way to distribute your
hosting using web RTC. I
don't know if you've seen
this yet, but you can
share the load of all
of your assets on your
site or specific, you know,
specific downloads videos or even
just the images and you,
you know, you go to
the site and everybody else
who goes, is sharing their
cash basically with you. So,
you know, you can take
a big load off of
your server that way. So
I thought that was really
interesting. So it's kind of
like, like, like, like BitTorrent
in the sense of, if
we're all here together, then
let's just serve it from
that person over there instead
of here. Exactly. Exactly. And
those are out in the
wild today. Right now. There's
one that was just bought
by Yahoo actually. So Yahoo
is interested in this kind
of technology. Yeah. Interesting. What
do you think some of
the threats are? The things
that could stop web RTC.
It seems like Apple and
Microsoft really haven't come out
and said anything about it
yet. And they just bought
Skype. Right? There's that? But
yeah, Apple actually joined the
working group quietly about a
month ago. Didn't really say
anything. There's no big fanfare
about it, but they are,
they have done that. So
that is quite possible. There's
movement there as far as
Microsoft goes, you know, I
don't know about that. I
think that, that, that is
the, the gray area right
now. People aren't sure what
Microsoft's going to do because
they have their own version
of the spec called CU
web RTC. And I think,
you know, until they get,
at least they've got other
ideas about how things should
be structured and until they
get at least some of
those ideas in there, I
think there's going to be,
you know, a little hiccup
with I E Well, I'm
sure they'll figure that out
at some point. And they
will. Exactly. I mean, especially
when we start getting more
and more developers building cool
stuff with us, there's no
stopping, no stopping progress. You
said about the, the, the,
the point that I will
install a plugin if necessary.
Certainly if my browser is
auto updating and it just
starts becoming ubiquitous when every
browser, but I E support
something, then eventually I, it
comes around like with web
GL. Right, exactly. But what
about, what about quality people
have said that web RTC
is using a very narrow
audio standard. It's using a
G seven 11, which is
really kind of less good
quality as most VoIP solutions
that are already out there.
Right. Is that going to
derail it? And we've got
four K TVs coming out,
you know, is web RTC
dead on arrival just because
the quality isn't high enough.
Well, I mean, you can
always there also the opportunity
to put in an additional
plugin for a different codex
that's, that's being done. There's
one for H to support
H two six for video
and Chrome. So, you know,
if you're building something where
you're going device to device,
you can kind of extend
things and, and go beyond
the Opus or the, you
know, the, the audio coding
that's being used right now.
But I think for just,
you know, over the web
kind of audio, it's, you
know, it's not bad, but
it's the, it's the video
codecs that are going to
get us, I think, cause
there's a fight right now
between Google and basically everyone
else about what the standard
codec is going to be
for, for a video. They
of course want VP eight
and just about everybody else
wants each two six for
just for backwards compatibility, but
in a way I think
Google's right, you know, VPA
can be better quality at
lower bit rates. So, you
know, I don't really have
a dog in the fight,
but it's going to be
interesting to see what they
decide to do if they
want to keep it agnostic
and let you choose which,
which one you want to,
you know, to use, or
if they're going to dictate,
you know, in Chrome you
can only use VPA in
the future. Yeah. I think
that, I mean, H two,
six, four is certainly the
one that everyone has it
top of mind and it
seems silly to, you know,
it's like, it's, it's the
whole beta max VHS situation.
Like yes, Betamax was better,
but we still didn't win.
So just let it go.
And please rewind. Now, you've,
you've talked about web RTC
all over and up at
the Stanford innovation center and
you've actually got a Pluralsight
course on this as well.
I have, I do. I
have a, a course, just
an, you know, an intro
intro course on Pluralsight, web
RTC fundamentals. And it's just
sort of outlines what it
is, how to get started,
you know, and I really
wanted to make that because
I felt that, you know,
when I was learning it,
it's, there wasn't anything very
assessable for people who might
have other, you know, base
of skills, but don't really
understand, you know, the intricacies
of, of sip and, you
know, handshaking and all of
that. There was really kind
of a, a really big
chasm there between just this
is what it is and
here's how to actually use
it now. So I felt
like I needed to, to
fill that gap and give
some, give some people things
to hold onto as they
climb up this, this very
tall climbing wall of web
RTC. Well, and I'm having
trouble climbing up the wall
of just HTML five in
the sense of there's just
so much now, you know,
like two years ago, the
idea that I could have
a tiny SQL server in
the browser and local storage.
And, and now there's new
popups. When I visit these
demos, my browser says, we'd
like to use your camera,
your location and your microphone.
I'm like, this is a,
it's a whole operating system
in Nebraska at this point.
Yeah. Yeah. It's, it can
be very overwhelming for sure.
Well, and again, not sure
whether I want to use
these things because they're not
on every browser. Like if
I use holding us back
or, or whatever. Right. You
know, I really think that
that it's coming. I really
think that it is. And
especially if you can have
machines talk to machines, there's
a big opportunity there as
well. So it's, it's not
all about just, you know,
sitting in the browser and,
and if that's a big
part of it, but that's,
you know, your client might
come to you or your
boss or somebody and say,
Hey, look, you know, what's
this thing that lets these
machines talk to each other,
how do we do this?
And you'll know how to
do Right. And we're certainly,
we can point out that
while it might feel like
web RTC is brand new.
People have been talking about
this since at least 2010,
2011. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's
true. And it's, you know,
it's getting a lot of,
a lot of hype right
now, but I think it
is well deserved. Yeah. Yeah.
Well, and it's in more
places than I would think.
Ah, I'm not sure what
version of Chrome I'm on
30 something, but it's been
around since Chrome, 20, 23
and Firefox 22. So yeah,
it's, it's been on, it's
actually on your computer right
now and you may not
even know it Exactly. You
don't know it. Very cool.
Well, I'm going to put
in the show notes links
to kind of all the
details you gave a talk
at fluent JS, the O'Reilly
fluent conference, and you had
all sorts of great examples
where you've got signaling with
socket IO, your Pluralsight fundamentals
course, and also web RTC
book by Alan Johnson and Daniel Burnett.
Yeah. That was, I think
they're coming out with a
third edition next week. So
Do I need to know
this much though? Can I,
can I, can I, can
I just know the basics,
like how far, how deep
do I have to go?
I think maybe if I
may, if I may, people
like you who've been doing
this for 10 years, I
mean, you've been involved in,
in large system, large scale
video for at least a
decade. Yeah, of course. You
know, it was the F
word, you know, the flash
days, but people are still
using that. I mean, and
that's the thing right now,
people are still using flash
media server or wows a
media server, which is uses
the same technology to do
this kind of thing because
it does work everywhere, but
it's a, there's a big
transition is going to happen
away from that as soon
as you know, it's ubiquitous.
So yes, I've been doing
it. I've been doing this
real time communication thing for,
for quite some time. And
I'm just, I'm really excited
about it because, you know,
the, the whole flash thing
is it was bogged down
by licensing. You know, it
was 4,500 bucks for a
server just to even play
with this stuff. And so,
you know, this being open
source and available to everybody,
I think that's really, really
exciting. Yeah. I think that
the way I phrase it,
cause I, you know, I,
you know, I work for
Microsoft and people are always
saying, Hey, why did you
kill? Why did you kill
silver light? And I said,
we didn't kill silver light.
The internet itself killed Silverlight
light. And you can cry
about that, but it's still
happening. So like flash people
and action script people have,
are crying, but at the
same time, you know, plugins
exists. Yeah. Plugins exist to
do what the browser can't
do. And then the browser
can do that. Plug in
no longer has a reason
to exist. And the new
plugins will come out to
do something more amazing. Exactly.
So even though you have
10 years of experience in
flash, you don't mourn, you
don't mourn flash. You know,
I had, I had a
moment. I did, you know,
I did, but no, I'm,
you know, it's really opened
up a lot of, of
other, other technologies, other ways
of looking at things and
I'm pretty excited about the
future. Very cool. Well, thanks
so much for chatting with
me today. Thank you for
having me. It was really
good to, to have this
talk. You can learn more
from lisa@learnfromlisa.com. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you again next
week.